Convert Addon Proposal to Application Proposal (#8276)
kubermatic/kubermatic: docs/proposals/improve-addons.md

- Creating a cluster is a two-step process; firstly you have to create a cluster and only  afterward you can select custom Addons

*note: PS team report that some customers are using weekly KKP update in dev environments, consequently they need to rebuild the addon image every week which is painful and error-prone.*

## Goals

- Decouple installation of Applications from KKP releases
- Be able to choose which Application should be installed during the cluster creation or in the cluster template
- Ensure Application is installed in user-cluster (reconciliation)
- The list of possible Applications to install should be administered by the KKP platform admin
- Be compatible with private registries in preparation for future air-gapped environment stories. The current Policy regarding the air-gapped environment is to assume a private trusted registry is available. Application Source (manifest of the workload to deployed) and workload images of the application should be configurable to point on a private registry
- Allow for easy management of multiple Application versions
- Allow use of manifests provided by the k8s community

## Non-Goals

> - The intent is not to invent a whole new package manager. Therefore dependency management outside an Application is currently out of scope

Reviewer: I would change:
> Therefore dependency management outside an Application is currently out of scope
to
>  Therefore dependency management outside a supported source type is out of scope.

Or something similar to this, what I mean is that helm support dependencies. The sentence indicates that application has to bundle all dependencies (which is not true in case of helm).

Author: I have clarified the paragraph

In order to work properly, the ApplicationDistributor must (dynamically) be able to discover all available SeedClusters, so it knows where to push the ApplicationDefinitions to.

In the case of the MasterCluster and SeedCluster being the same, we propose to still run the ApplicationDistributor exactly the same. Concretely this means it would have one target seed cluster (itself) and create a merged catalogue for it. This would have the advantage, that in case customers decide to add new seed clusters, the new seed clusters would work right out-of-the-box. Additionally, this helps keeping the code generic, which is in line with KKPs development pattern.

Furthermore, the ApplicationDistributor ensures that there are no duplicate Applications. A duplicate is defined by two Applications having the same `name` and `version`. We propose to protect against accidental duplicates using a ValidationWebhook.
Lastly, we envisioned two possible sources for a ApplicationDefinitions:

- watching for changes of ApplicationDefinition Custom Resources directly inside KKP master

> - watching a git repository → this idea was developed from PS feedback. It would enable customers to manage their applications in a GitOps way

Reviewer: I would kill this idea, we are not building CI/CD, that should be handled by customers.

      - type →Type of the field. We propose that references for now can only be primary types (number, string, ...), but do not allow for nested types (e.g. objects). This makes rendering them a lot more convenient
      - (optional) helpText →helpText to be displayed in the UI
  - a source from where to pull the data from. Possible sources are:
    - git → a git repository from which to pull the manifests. This was considered to be especially useful by Kubermatic PS who work directly with customers
    - helm → a helm repository to pull charts from. Only compatible with rendering method helm
  - constraints. These describe conditions that must apply for an add-on to be compatible with a user cluster. Possible constraints are:
    - kkp-version → semVer range that describes compatible KKP versions
    - k8s-version → semVer range that describes compatible k8s versions
  - values → These are values that can be used for overwriting defaults. We think this field will be required for Application if a customer is using a private registry. So application can be configured

An example CR could look like this:

```yaml

> apiVersion: kubermatic.k8c.io/v1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
apiVersion: apps.kubermatic.k8c.io/v1
```

In order to do, this the following changes need to be made to the cluster and clustertemplate objects

**cluster**

We propose a similar approach to what we currently do with the `nodeDeployment` field. Specifically, we would extend the cluster object with a new field `applications` which contains a list of all Applications as [ApplicationRefs](###ApplicationInstallation-CR), value overrides etc. We think it is necessary to (initially) store this in cluster object, so a user can set Applications directly at cluster creation. To alleviate the size issue we propose a clean-up mechanism like the `nodeDeployment` has. Specifically the `cluster` controller would go through the list of Applications and create an ApplicationInstallation for each of the items. Afterwards the controller is going to delete the entry from the list. This will reduce bloat on the cluster object.

This might lead to the question: Why use ApplicationInstallation CRs at all? For this, we think having the CR is going to make routine operations (e.g. fetching, updating Applications) much easier and less resource-intensive.

> Alternatives considered: We considered the idea of creating CRs directly on the POST call in the api. This theoretically would have the advantage that you would not need to store all AddonRefs and their values in the cluster object. We decided to not go with this for the following reasons:

Reviewer: I think adding a new endpoint for creating application CR is better. You would not have to refactor the `CreateEndpoint`. I think UI should handle requests for creating clusters and later requests for applications when the cluster is ready. It could be done over some mechanims like promises. However, we have to ask about that somebody from the UI team. @maciaszczykm what do you think?

EDIT: although giving this a second thought, it might not be a bad idea to extend cluster. I don't have very strong opinion here.

Reviewer: btw please change `AddonsRef` to `ApplicationRef`

Reviewer 3: For initial addons/applications (ones created with the cluster; from wizard) I'd say it would be the best to keep them as part of the cluster object (perhaps in the annotation like initial node deployment) and then create addons/application CR? For the existing clusters I'd use CRs only.

cc @kubermatic/sig-ui @kubermatic/sig-ui for more opinions on this

Author: @mfranczy changed to ApplicationRef

2. The option would not allow to use Applications in clustertemplates as their information only gets passed from the FE directly to the endpoint

**clustertemplate**

In order to make it possible for users to deploy a cluster with a set of Applications, we need to persist them in the clustertemplate. For this we unfortunately do not see any other way than to store a list of [ApplicationRefs](###ApplicationInstallation-CR) and value overrides. As a result, we might have to place a limit on the number of Applications you can have in a template. This is because clustertemplates get stored in a CR, which has the standard k8s size limit of 1MB.

### ApplicationInstallation CR

- contains a mapping of a specific Application and cluster where to install
  - the Application is specified by an ApplicationRef. Currently, this consists of a name and version
  - the cluster where to install is specified by the namespace the ApplicationInstallation was created in (`metadata.namespace`) => the clusterID must be passed to k8c-api
- contains the merged values that are being passed for the installation. This is needed as customers can set custom values for each installation.

```yaml

> apiVersion: kubermatic.k8c.io/v1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
apiVersion: apps.kubermatic.k8c.io/v1
```

kind: ApplicationInstallation
metadata:
  name: prometheus

>     namespace: cluster-47s2ddlfgj

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  namespace: cluster-47s2ddlfgj
```

> kind: ApplicationInstallation

Reviewer: IMO should be deployed on the user cluster not on the seed.

Reviewer: My reasoning here is that `ApplicationInstallation`  is user cluster specific those should be deployed there.

spec:
  targetNamespace: monitoring
  createNamespace: true # flag to create the targetNamespace
  applicationRef:
    name: prometheus-node-exporter
    version: v1
  values: # Both structure and values depend on what is configured in the application
    abc: xyz
```

### ApplicationInstallationController

> The ApplicationInstallationController resides in the seed cluster. Its main purpose is to watch ApplicationInstallation CRs and ensure that the requested Applications are installed/modified/deleted in the corresponding user clusters. By extension of this, the ApplicationInstallationController needs to be able to fetch the manifests for Applications.

Reviewer: As I understand the installation controller would be deployed on the seed in the kubermatic namespace and watch all user clusters. I think we should change that. Instead of having relation one to many in that case it's better to have relation one to one.

It could be that we deploy application installation controller in the cluster namespace and it deploys ApplicationInstallation CR in the user cluster (similar like Machine Controller works and creates machines objects on the user cluster).

@moadqassem @kron4eg any opinion on this?

Reviewer 4: It makes sense if we want to expose ApplicationInstallation CR to the end user, in the user-cluster API. A-la MachineDeployment. But the question is: is it the case?

Reviewer: I think it is, in my opinion this should be exposed to the end user (user cluster admin). @SimonTheLeg @vgramer what's your point of view on this?

Reviewer: and @shaase-ctrl ^

Reviewer 5: Sorry, I did not make it in time over the weekend. 
We need to have a user cluster admin be able to install apps for his cluster. KKP admins that need to configure everything per cluster is contrary to the self-service platform we built.

Reviewer 4: I don't think it's possible to expose it, as it's defined as

> contains a mapping of a specific Application and cluster where to install

Reviewer 2: With the current design, KKP admin defined possible applications to install by creating an `ApplicationDefinition` CR in the master cluster. The `ApplicationDistributor` controller distributes these CRs to all seeds. 

the `ApplicationInstallation` CR  contains a reference to the `ApplicationDefinition` CR and the version of the application. this reference is used to know how to install the application.

if we move the `ApplicationInstallation` to the user-cluster and the `ApplicationInstallationController` into the cluster-namespace. That means we have to either:

1.  have a client to the seed cluster in the `ApplicationInstallationController` to be able to retrieve to the corresponding `ApplicationDefinition` CR. 
2. have a controller (ApplicationDistributor controller ?) that replicates `ApplicationDefinition` CR into each user cluster. So the `ApplicationInstallationController` can retrieve it.

Solution 1 seems pretty messy to me. especially if we consider deletion of an `ApplicationDefinition` CR  by a KKP admin. what happens to applications already installed.  

With solution 2, the deletion can be handled by an ownerRef set to `ApplicationInstalltion` CR inside the user-cluster.  When a KKP admin deletes an `ApplicationDefinition` CR, the deletion is eventually propagated to user-cluster and applications are removed.

Author: In addition to @vgramer comments, maybe a short background and two follow-up questions from my side

Background:
We had two initial ideas behind placing the ApplicationInstallationCRs inside the seed:
1. It would be tough for cluster admins to create invalid ApplicationInstallationCRs, as they can only use the UI to create them. This was born out of the idea that the majority of Application users would use the UI. Which sounds plausible to me, because if someone is more proficient in k8s and knows how to use helm, kustomized, etc., they would not really need the KKP Application feature. => now I think we can drop this issue, as we extend our ValidatingWebhook to ensure that no invalid ApplicationInstallationCRs can be created/edited (I think we just need to add that users cannot change the status field, otherwise Application state could get messy). @shaase-ctrl from a product-mgmt perspective: should the Cluster admin be able to edit ApplicationInstallations using the k8s api or would it be sufficient if they can do it via the UI?
2. Reduce the number of cross-cluster calls. We need to be aware of the fact that moving the ApplicationInstallationCRs into the user clusters will result in more cross-cluster calls. This is due to the fact that we need to keep ApplicationDefinitions in the seed cluster (otherwise cluster admins could just edit the definitions and make up their own Applications). This in turn means that for almost every interaction with the ApplicationInstallation we need to call the seed. From my previous experience I would always try to reduce cross cluster calls, but I am not sure how we feel about them at Kubermatic. Who would be the best person to weigh in on this?

Reviewer 5: Using the seeds for such features is the intention of how I would like to evolve KKP in general. We deliver additional features via the seeds in order to steer traffic, access etc. 

1. UI and API, it is as you reasoned, in the beginning more UI, later on more automation via API. For an MVP we could start with UI and go with API later (but it should be possible). The spread of the user base is quite large in the end.

2. Very good point for the cross cluster calls, I do not think that we optimized for this, but it is a good consideration. Overall this is a clash between control for KKP admin and flexibility for user cluster admin. My thoughts on this revolve around the possibility to use helm anyway in a user cluster for the user cluster admin, but helm could be delivered via the "applications" feature. Control and flexibility if you will. If I understood correctly what @vgramer  said, kkp admins could involuntarily delete apps that are in use, which could be quite unfortunate. In order to get to a result, I think we should go with the kkp admin approach you already have for "applications" and see if there is a huge demand for independently manage "applications" via the user cluster admin. Thanks @mfranczy @SimonTheLeg @vgramer and @kron4eg for your considerations.

Reviewer: @SimonTheLeg 

> It would be tough for cluster admins to create invalid ApplicationInstallationCRs

We should have a proper validation (on the client and server side), it should not matter if this is UI or API.

>  because if someone is more proficient in k8s and knows how to use helm, kustomized, etc., they would not really need the KKP Application feature. => now

Initially when I thought about this application mechanism I didn't mean to do it because some users don't know helm, it was for sake of automation and improved user experience (without forcing people to create their own automation on top to deploy standard apps they require - that's important with massive cluster creation)

> Reduce the number of cross-cluster calls. We need to be aware of the fact that moving the ApplicationInstallationCRs into the user clusters will result in more cross-cluster calls. This is due to the fact that we need to keep ApplicationDefinitions in the seed cluster (otherwise cluster admins could just edit the definitions and make up their own Applications).

Correct me if I am wrong, but IMO you won't reduce them here because the Application controller has to watch resources on the seed and user anyway. If `ApplicationInstallation` is deployed on the seed you have to check deployed resources on the user cluster to update the CR status. Or if `ApplicationInstallation` is on the user you have to get `ApplicationDefinition` CR.

@vgramer

> have a client to the seed cluster in the ApplicationInstallationController to be able to retrieve to the corresponding ApplicationDefinition CR.

Application controller has to be aware of seed and user clusters. Even with the current design while keeping the `ApplicationInstallation` CR on the seed you have to make a call to the user cluster to create a resource there over helm, k8s client or whatever source type you support.

Since the controller would run on the seed you have to get a client to user cluster (similar way how the current addon mechanism works).

If you move `ApplicationInstallation` CR to user you could have a custom informer to catch `ApplicationDefinition` events and map them to `ApplicationInstallation` CR events.

After all that's just my opinion, if you still feel different about that and have majority in this go ahead and continue with your idea.

  - values → These are values that can be used for overwriting defaults. We think this field will be required for Application if a customer is using a private registry. So application can be configured

An example CR could look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: kubermatic.k8c.io/v1
kind: ApplicationDefinition
metadata:
 name: prometheus-node-exporter
spec:
  description: "The Prometheus Node Exporter exposes a wide variety of hardware- and kernel-related metrics."
  versions:
    - version: "v1"
      template:
        method: helm
        formSpec:
          - displayName: Replicas
            internalName: spec.replicas
            required: true
            type: number
            helpText: "Number of replicas."
          - displayName: Description
            internalName: desc
            required: false
            type: text
        source:
          type:
            helm:
              # helm related params...
        constraints:
          kkpVersion:
          k8sVersion:
    - version: "v2"
      template:
          method: helm
        source:
          type: git
            # git related params...
        constraints: # omitted for clarity
```

> Note on CRDs in general: The ApplicationDefinition strongly benefits from [OpenAPIv3's `oneOf` functionality](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/data-models/oneof-anyof-allof-not/), which is supported by Kubernetes. For example in the yaml above, you could say a source must be `oneOf` `docker` or `git`. The cool thing about `oneOf` is that `docker` and `git` can have totally have different fields from each other, but still would be statically validated. However, syntax like this is [not yet supported in kubebuilder](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-tools/issues/461), which we use to generate the CRDs. Nonetheless, we would still propose to use kubebuilder for now as the advantages of an automated generation outweigh the downside of not being able to do oneOf (yet).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note on CRDs in general: The ApplicationDefinition strongly benefits from [OpenAPIv3's `oneOf` functionality](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/data-models/oneof-anyof-allof-not/), which is supported by Kubernetes. For example in the yaml above, you could say a source must be `oneOf` `helm` or `git`. The cool thing about `oneOf` is that `helm` and `git` can have totally have different fields from each other, but still would be statically validated. However, syntax like this is [not yet supported in kubebuilder](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-tools/issues/461), which we use to generate the CRDs. Nonetheless, we would still propose to use kubebuilder for now as the advantages of an automated generation outweigh the downside of not being able to do oneOf (yet).
```

### Updates to KKP API

- adding an endpoint to list compatible Applications given a set of constraints (eg k8s version). This will be required to make it possible for users to select applications in the cluster wizard (see #6000)

> - creating ApplicationsInstallations for each user cluster. It is important to note that it only creates the CRs which Application should be installed in which cluster, but does not do the installation of the Application itself (this task will be done by the ApplicationInstallationController).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- adding an endpoint to install an application in a user cluster. It is important to note that it only creates the CRs which Application should be installed in which cluster, but does not do the installation of the Application itself (this task will be done by the ApplicationInstallationController).
```

*tbd: As a result of this complexity we thought of two options:*

a) Create ApplicationCRs directly inside the cluster object and then have the ApplicationInstallationController watch the cluster CR

- we would extend the cluster object with an Applications field that contains a list of all Applications and their values
- the ApplicationInstallationController would watch the cluster CR and create corresponding ApplicationInstallation CRs

This implementation is close to the status quo of packing everything into the cluster object and then react to it. However we have the concern that the sum of all ApplicationInstallations with all of its fields can become quite large and result in a too large cluster object

b) Create CRs directly during cluster creation

we would extend the `CreateEndpoint` func to:

- create the seed-namespace right after the cluster object has been created. We need to make sure this early creation does not interfere with the seed-controller
- create the application CRs after the namespace has been created

> This option would keep the cluster-object in its current size. However we are currently not sure if there are any implications from creating the namespace early. We think this will have no implication for cluster templates, as they are based on the selected UI values, which would contain the Application information.

Reviewer 2: In fact, it may have an impact because the cluster template is stored in `clustertemplate` and cluster are created from `clustertemplateinstances` CR.  So I have to check if we may encounter the same kind of problem regarding the size.

Author: updated section with a new idea @vgramer and I developed

Implementation Hint: In any case (a or b) we also have to update the validation cluster method to ensure applications are valid.

### ApplicationInstallation CR

- contains a mapping of a specific Application and cluster where to install
  - the Application is specified by an ApplicationRef. Currently, this consists of a name and version
  - the cluster where to install is specified by the namespace the ApplicationInstallation was created in (`metadata.namespace`) => the clusterID must be passed to k8c-api
- contains the merged values that are being passed for the installation. This is needed as customers can set custom values for each installation.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubermatic.k8c.io/v1
kind: ApplicationInstallation
metadata:
  name: prometheus
    namespace: cluster-47s2ddlfgj
spec:
  targetNamespace: monitoring
  createNamespace: true # flag to create the targetNamespace
  applicationRef:

>     name: prometheus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    name: prometheus-node-exporter
```
to be coherent with the example of  `ApplicationDefinition` CR

    version: v1
  values: # Both structure and values depend on what is configured in the application
    abc: xyz
```

### ApplicationInstallationController

The ApplicationInstallationController resides in the seed cluster. Its main purpose is to watch ApplicationInstallation CRs and ensure that the requested Applications are installed/modified/deleted in the corresponding user clusters. By extension of this, the ApplicationInstallationController needs to be able to fetch the manifests for Applications.

> The functionality of the ApplicationInstallationController depends on the selected `source` and `method` in the ApplicationInstallation CR. To start we propose the following sources and methods:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The functionality of the ApplicationInstallationController depends on the selected `source` and `method` in the ApplicationDefinition CR. To start we propose the following sources and methods:
```

> **Sources**

Reviewer 2: i would move this part, next to ApplicationDefinition CR

Author: I think this would break this paragraph a bit. Because in the bullets we often describe what the ApplicationInstallationController currently is doing for the given source.

Reviewer 2: fair enough
